                                HHS Public Access
                                Author manuscript
                                Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
Author Manuscript




                    Published in final edited form as:
                     Am J Med Genet A. 2013 June ; 0(6): 1238–1263. doi:10.1002/ajmg.a.35934.



                    Elements of Morphology: Standard Terminology for the External
                    Genitalia
                    Raoul C.M. Hennekam1,*, Judith E. Allanson2, Leslie G. Biesecker3, John C. Carey4, John
                    M. Opitz4, and Eric Vilain5

                    1Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Author Manuscript




                    Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2Department of Genetics, Children?s Hospital of
                    Eastern Ontario, Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada 3National
                    Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 4Division of
                    Medical Genetics, Human Genetics, Pathology, Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Utah,
                    Salt Lake City, Utah 5Departments of Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Urology, David Geffen
                    School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California

                    Abstract
                         An international group of clinicians working in the field of dysmorphology has initiated the
                         standardization of terms used to describe human morphology. The goals are to standardize these
                         terms and reach consensus regarding their definitions. In this way, we will increase the utility of
                         descriptions of the human phenotype and facilitate reliable comparisons of findings among
Author Manuscript




                         patients. Discussions with other workers in dysmorphology and related fields, such as
                         developmental biology and molecular genetics, will becomemore precise. Here we introduce the
                         anatomy of the male and female genitalia, and define and illustrate the terms that describe the
                         major characteristics of these body regions.


                    Keywords
                         nomenclature; definitions; ontology; genitalia; male genitalia; female genitalia; anatomy;
                         anthropometry; morphology; dysmorphology


                    INTRODUCTION
Author Manuscript




                    General
                                     This paper is part of a series of papers defining the morphologic variations of the human
                                     body detectable by surface examination [Biesecker et al., 2009; Carey et al., 2009; Hall et
                                     al., 2009;Hennekam et al., 2009; Hunter et al., 2009; Allanson et al., 2009b]. Additional
                                     papers on the morphology of the limbs and trunk are in preparation. The series is
                                     accompanied by an introductory paper describing general aspects of this project [Allanson et
                                     al., 2009a]. The reader is encouraged to consult the introduction when using the definitions.


                    *
                    Correspondence to: Dr. R.C. Hennekam, Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, Floor H7-236,Meibergdreef 9, 1105
                    AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.c.hennekam@amc.uva.nl.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                              Page 2


                       MALE EXTERNAL GENITALIA
Author Manuscript




                       Anatomy of the Male External Genitalia
                                      The normal anatomy of the male external genitalia is shown in Figures 1 and 2. Some
                                      anatomical landmarks deserve specific mention as these are not used consistently.

                                      Penile shaft: the part of the penis running from the abdominal wall to the corona.

                                      Penile raphé: slightly elevated line of tissue on the ventral aspect of the shaft of the penis,
                                      continuing on to the foreskin.

                                      Corona: a semi-circular prominence of the glans of the penis, situated on the dorsum of the
                                      penile shaft. In a flaccid penis it is usually covered by the foreskin except in men who have
                                      been fully circumcised.
Author Manuscript




                                      Glans penis: the rounded tip of the penis, demarcated from the shaft by the sulcus. In a
                                      flaccid penis it is usually covered by the foreskin except in men who have been fully
                                      circumcised.

                                      Meatus: a slit-like opening on the tip of the glans of the penis, running in a ventral–dorsal
                                      direction.

                                      Urethral raphé: a slightly elevated ridge of skin extending from the ventral aspect of the
                                      meatus to the frenulum.

                                      Foreskin: a loose fold of skin (outer) and mucous membrane (inner) arising from the shaft
                                      of the penis, and in a flaccid penis usually covering the glans. In young boys, the
Author Manuscript




                                      demarcation of the foreskin and glans is often not fully formed, prohibiting retraction of the
                                      foreskin below the corona.

                                      Frenulum of the foreskin: a band of elastic tissue covered by mucous membrane on the
                                      ventral side of the penis attaching the foreskin to the glans of the penis.

                                      Scrotum: a loose sac of skin containing the testes and located inferior to the base of the
                                      penis. Scrotal skin has small elevations (rugae) on the surface and is more pigmented than
                                      the remainder of the body, irrespective of ethnic background, although this distinction is
                                      more obvious in individuals with a dark skin.

                                      Scrotal raphé: a slightly elevated ridge of tissue running from the base of the penis to the
                                      midline of the perineum. The scrotal raphe is in continuity with the penile raphé superiorly
Author Manuscript




                                      and the perineal raphé inferiorly. Slight hyperpigmentation of the genital raphés (penile,
                                      scrotal, and perineal) is almost invariably present.

                                      Perineal raphé: a slightly elevated ridge of tissue in the midline of the perineum running
                                      from the inferior attachment of the scrotum to the anus and in continuity with the scrotal
                                      raphé.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 3


                                      Testis: a mobile ovoid-shaped organ palpable and usually partly visible through the skin of
Author Manuscript




                                      the scrotum.

                                      Epididymis: an oblong organ attached to the testis. The epididymis can be visualized by
                                      trans-illumination and is palpable in the scrotum.

                       Pubertal Stages
                                      The timing of puberty varies greatly in the general population and is influenced by genetic
                                      and environmental factors [Gajdon et al., 2009]. In evaluating the pubertal development in a
                                      child, ethnic background and intra-familial variation should be taken into account. Tanner
                                      stages are commonly used to score pubertal development [Tanner, 1986]. In males, the
                                      stages are determined by assessing the length and width of the penis, size of the testes, and
                                      pubic hair growth (Fig. 3). As each of these components is defined here separately, the
                                      pubertal stages are not discussed in further detail.
Author Manuscript




                       Measurements of the Male External Genitalia
                                      Measurements of the penis are possible using sliding calipers or a straight-edged plastic
                                      ruler. The reliability of measurements using a tape measure is poor. Penile length is
                                      measured from the base of the gently stretched penis at the pubic symphysis to the tip of the
                                      glans without including the foreskin. Fat pads at the base of the penis influence this
                                      measurement and the ruler should be pressing against the pubic symphysis. Determining of
                                      the size of the testes are performed either by estimation of the size of the testes by palpation
                                      and comparison with a Prader orchidometer (Fig. 4), or by measuring width and length of
                                      the testis using calipers, straight ruler, or tape measure. Results of measurements determined
                                      by calipers, rulers or tape measures typically yield larger estimates of the testicular volume
                                      than those by Prader orchidometers, and, over time, measurements in individual patients
Author Manuscript




                                      should be performed using the same method.

                                      The reader is referred to the Handbook of Normal Physical Measurements [Hall et al., 2007]
                                      for detailed descriptions of measurement techniques and growth standards. Except for
                                      pubertal developmental stages, growth standards are provided for Caucasians of Northern
                                      European extraction only, but abundant data on penile growth in individuals of other ethnic
                                      backgrounds have been published.

                       Anatomical Variation
                                      Variations of the anatomy of the male external genitalia may be assessed as quantitative
                                      (objective or anthropometric) traits and qualitative (subjective or categorical) features:
Author Manuscript




                                          1.   Variations in length: long penis; short penis.

                                          2.   Variations in width: wide penis; narrow penis.

                                          3.   Variations in length and width: absent penis; absent foreskin; small scrotum; absent
                                               scrotum, (apparently) absent testis; small testis; large testis; supernumerary testis.

                                          4.   Variations in shape or position: ambiguous genitalia; bladder exstrophy, bifid
                                               penis; penile torsion, epispadias; hypospadias; microphallus; penile chordee;



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                                Page 4


                                               webbed penis; penoscrotal transposition; accessory scrotum, bifid scrotum; shawl
Author Manuscript




                                               scrotum; ectopic scrotum, cryptorchidism; hydrocele.

                                          5.   Variations in cutaneous manifestations: freckled genitalia; hyperpigmented
                                               genitalia; hypopigmented genitalia; sparse pubic hair.

                                      The various findings are listed alphabetically. If a feature is indicated in bold -italics, the
                                      feature is listed and a definition is available. The terms are alphabetized based on the
                                      physical feature, not the modifier.

                                      Investigating the genitalia should always be performed with the observed person in a relaxed
                                      position. The presence of a nurse or parent is advisable.Small children are best investigated
                                      in theirparent’s lap. The testes can be palpated in a supine position but itmay be useful to ask
                                      the observed person to squat as this allows better palpation. Repeat genital examinations
                                      may be embarrassing for the subject [Lee et al., 2006] and should be performed only when
Author Manuscript




                                      indicated.

                       DEFINITIONS
                                      Anorchia: See Testis, (apparently) absent

                                      Aphallia: See Penis, absent

                                      Aposthia: See Foreskin, absent

                       Bladder, Exstrophy
                                      Definition: Eversion of the posterior bladder wall through the congenitally absent lower
                                      anterior abdominal wall and anterior bladder wall (Fig. 5). objective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: Exstrophy of the bladder can be associated with Epispadias and Bifid penis or
                                      in females with Bifid clitoris, a bifid uterus, and a Septated vagina, each of which should be
                                      coded separately.

                       Chordee
                                      Definition: Ventral, lateral, or ventrolateral bowing of the shaft and glans penis of more
                                      than 30 degrees (Fig. 6). objective

                                      Comments: The degree of variation of penis curvature is a continuum, but traditionally 30
                                      degrees is considered the threshold for surgical intervention on chordee [Bologna et al.,
                                      1999]. Bowing usually becomes more obvious in an erect penis, but is frequently also
Author Manuscript




                                      palpable when stretching a flaccid penis. Chordee can be congenital or acquired; if the
                                      former, it can be associated with Webbed Penis or Hypospadias, which should be coded
                                      separately.

                       Cryptorchidism
                                      Definition: Testis in inguinal canal. objective




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 5


                                      Comments: The gonad is mobile and can be retracted superiorly by the cremaster muscle
Author Manuscript




                                      reflex stimulated, for instance, by cold or touch. A retracted testis is not cryptorchidism. An
                                      abdominal testis cannot be distinguished by physical examination from an (Apparently)
                                      absent testis and requires radiological (or, rarely, surgical) procedures for assessment.

                                      Synonym: Testis, undescended

                                      Diphallus: See Penis, bifid

                       Epispadias
                                      Definition: Dorsal placement of the urethral opening (Fig. 7). objective

                                      Comments: Epispadias may be present in a phenotypic male, female, or an individual with
                                      ambiguous genitalia. A meatus in a phenotypic male may be positioned either on the glans
Author Manuscript




                                      (glandular or balanic epispadias), the shaft (penile epispadias) or at the attachment of the
                                      penis to the abdominal wall (penopubic epispadias). Alternatively, the urethra may be an
                                      open groove along the dorsal shaft of the penis, with no readily recognized meatus.
                                      Epispadias is a frequent component of Bladder exstrophy, but should be coded separately.

                       Foreskin, Absent
                                      Definition: Complete absence of the foreskin (Fig. 8). objective

                                      Comments: Absence of the foreskin can be accompanied by Cryptorchidism and
                                      Hypospadias, which should be coded separately.

                                      Synonym: Aposthia
Author Manuscript




                                      Foreskin, aposthia: See Foreskin, absent

                       Genitalia, Ambiguous
                                      Definition: External genitalia without typical male or female appearance (Fig. 9). subjective

                                      Comments: Note that this term can include or combine variations in size and shape, with
                                      partial or complete absence of structures. It is preferable to describe the individual
                                      components, which are defined below. It is nonetheless a widely used bundled term and as
                                      such is retained here (for the definition of a “bundled term” see Allanson et al. [2009a]). The
                                      distinction of this finding from a marked degree of Hypospadias is an example of how this
                                      term can be problematic.
Author Manuscript




                                      Synonym: Intersex genitalia

                                      Genitalia, ephelides: See Genitalia, freckled

                       Genitalia, Freckled
                                      Definition: One or more brown punctate macules on the skin of the genitalia (Fig. 10).
                                      objective



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 6


                                      Comments: This should be differentiated from Hyperpigmented genitalia in which an area
Author Manuscript




                                      larger than a freckle or the complete external genitalia are hyperpigmented. The description
                                      should be qualified by a description of the affected part(s).

                                      Synonym: Genitalia, ephelides

                       Genitalia, Hyperpigmented
                                      Definition: Localized or generalized increased genital pigmentation (Fig. 11). subjective

                                      Comments: This is an assessment of the relative pigmentation of the genitalia compared to
                                      the overall pigmentation of the individual. Hyperpigmentation can affect other parts of the
                                      body or be restricted to the genitalia. Genital hyperpigmentation can be generalized or
                                      localized. Localized areas of hyperpigmentation of the glans of the penis are especially
                                      common. This should be differentiated from Freckled genitalia in which one or more small,
Author Manuscript




                                      focal areas of hyperpigmentation are present. Localized hyperpigmentation can be
                                      objectively determined due to the difference from the immediate surrounding tissue color,
                                      while generalized hyperpigmentation may be more difficult to determine and is therefore a
                                      subjective manifestation. If the finding is localized, the description should be appended with
                                      a description of the affected part(s).

                                      Replaces: Penile melanosis

                       Genitalia, Hypopigmented
                                      Definition: Localized or generalized decreased genital pigmentation (Fig. 12). subjective

                                      Comments: This is an assessment of the relative pigmentation of the genitalia compared to
Author Manuscript




                                      the overall pigmentation of the individual. Hypopigmentation can affect other parts of the
                                      body or be restricted to the genitalia. Genital hypopigmentation can be generalized or
                                      localized. Localized hypopigmentation can be objectively determined due to the difference
                                      fromthe immediate surrounding tissue color, while generalized hypopigmentation may
                                      bemore difficult to determine and is therefore a subjective manifestation.

                                      Genitalia, intersex: See Genitalia, ambiguous

                       Hydrocele
                                      Definition: Presence of increased fluid around testis leading to an enlarged scrotum or
                                      hemiscrotum (Fig. 13). Subjective

                                      Comments: The testis itself may not be palpable in the presence of large fluid amounts. The
Author Manuscript




                                      assessment of this finding may be aided by trans-illumination.

                       Hypospadias
                                      Definition: Ventral placement of the urethral opening (Fig. 14). objective

                                      Comments: Hypospadias is categorized in several ways, the most classical one being first
                                      degree (urethral opening on the ventral glans), second degree (urethral opening on the


                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                           Page 7


                                      ventral shaft), and third degree (urethral opening on the perineum). Second degree
Author Manuscript




                                      hypospadias is frequently accompanied by Chordee of the penis, which should be coded
                                      separately. The widely used Duckett classification [Baskin and Duckett, 1996] categorizes
                                      hypospadias into glandular, coronal, distal penile shaft (or “anterior”) subgroup, mid-shaft
                                      (or “middle”) subgroup, or proximal penile shaft, penoscrotal, and perineal (or “posterior”)
                                      subgroup. A surgically oriented categorization to classify hypospadias has been developed
                                      based on the position of the division of the corpus spongiosum relative to the penile shaft
                                      and bony structures of the pelvis [Orkiszewski, 2012].

                                      Macro-orchidism: See Testis, large

                                      Macropenis: See Penis, long

                                      Megalopenis: See Penis, long
Author Manuscript




                                      Micropenis: See Penis, short

                       Microphallus
                                      Definition: Length of penis more than 2 SD below the mean for age accompanied by
                                      hypospadias (Fig. 15). objective OR

                                      Apparently decreased length of penis for age with hypospadias. Subjective

                                      Comments: Traditionally a distinction is made between a Short penis, a short penis with
                                      otherwise normal anatomy, versus microphallus, a short penis with hypospadias. Penile
                                      length is the distance between the midline attachment of the gently stretched, flaccid penis
                                      above the pubic symphysis and tip of the glans. Details on measurement of the penis can be
Author Manuscript




                                      found elsewhere [Hall et al., 2007]. There are no reliable studies showing a relation between
                                      ethnicity and penile length [Adams, 1996]. There are some data on interethnic differences in
                                      the lower limit of penile length in newborns [Cheng and Chanoine, 2001].Ashort penis
                                      should be differentiated from an inconspicuous penis, for instance due to excessive
                                      suprapubic fat (“buried”) [Bergeson et al., 1993]. We also recognize that shortnessof a penis
                                      is defined by some subspecialists as penile length more than 2.5 SD below the mean.

                                      Replaces: Penis, hypoplastic; Penis, hypotrophic; Penis, small

                                      Penile melanosis: See Genitalia, hyperpigmented

                       Penis, Absent
                                      Definition: Lack of recognizable penile structures (Fig. 16). objective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: Absence of the penis is always accompanied by abnormal position of the
                                      meatus (usually in the perineum, sometimes in the rectum), may be accompanied by
                                      Cryptorchidism [Chibber et al., 2005], and is often associated with non-genital anomalies
                                      [Roth et al., 1981], which all should be coded separately. Absent penis should be
                                      differentiated froma penis concealed within pre-pubic fat tissue.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                            Page 8


                                      Synonym: Aphallia
Author Manuscript




                       Penis, Bifid
                                      Definition:Twopenile structures, separated from the tip to the base of the shaft (Fig. 17).
                                      ObjectiveOR

                                      Longitudinal indentation, cleft, or depressionof the glans with or without involvement of the
                                      shaft of the penis. Objective

                                      Comments:Note the second definition denotes a bundled term, but as it is commonly used
                                      in practice it is kept here. In individuals with complete duplication often one will find
                                      Hypospadias, Epispadias, Bladder exstrophy, or Bifid scrotum, which should be coded
                                      separately, as well as urinary tract duplications, renal anomalies, and gastrointestinal
                                      duplications [Keckler et al., 2009]. The terms indicate the presence of (part of) two penises,
Author Manuscript




                                      but do not indicate whether they are caused by splitting or double formation.

                                      Synonym: Diphallus; Penis, duplicated

                                      Penis, duplicated: See Penis, bifid

                                      Penis, hyperplastic: See Penis, long

                                      Penis, hypertrophic: See Penis, long

                                      Penis, hypoplastic: See Penis, short

                                      Penis, hypotrophic: See Penis, shor
Author Manuscript




                                      Penis, large: Not defined as this is a bundled term encompassing both a Long penis and
                                      Wide penis

                       Penis, Long
                                      Definition: Penile length more than 2 SD above the mean for age (Fig. 18). objective OR

                                      Apparently increased penile length for age. Subjective

                                      Comments: Penile length is the distance between the midline attachment of the gently
                                      stretched, flaccid penis above the pubic symphysis and tip of the glans. Details on
                                      measurement of the penis can be found elsewhere [Hall et al., 2007]. This measurement and
                                      assessment may not be possible for an individual with Chordee. There are no reliable studies
Author Manuscript




                                      showing a relation between ethnicity and penile length [Adams, 1996].

                                      Replaces: Penis, hyperplastic; Penis hypertrophic; Megalopenis; Macropenis; Penis, large

                       Penis, Narrow
                                      Definition: Penile width more than 2 SD below the mean for age. objective OR

                                      Circumference of the flaccid penis more than 2 SD below the mean for age. objective OR


                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                               Page 9


                                      Apparently decreased penile width for age. subjective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: Penile width is the distance between left and right side of the flaccid penis at
                                      the attachment to the skin above the pubic symphysis. Normal values for penile width only
                                      exist for newborns [Cheng and Chanoine, 2001] and adults [Schneider et al., 2001].
                                      Alternatively, penile circumference can be measured, as normal values are available at all
                                      ages [Damon et al., 1990]. Note the site of measurement (base; mid-shaft; under glans) may
                                      differ in the various studies [Ajmani et al., 1985; Ponchietti et al., 2001; Cinaz et al., 2012].
                                      It is important that the measurement site be consistent with that of the published norms.

                       Penis, Short
                                      Definition: Penile length more than 2 SD below the mean for age (Fig. 19). objective OR

                                      Apparently decreased penile length for age. subjective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: Traditionally a distinction is made between micropenis, a short penis with
                                      otherwise normal anatomy versus Microphallus, a short penis with hypospadias. Penile
                                      length is the distance between the midline attachment of the gently stretched, flaccid penis
                                      above the pubic symphysis and tip of the glans. Details on measurement of the penis can be
                                      found elsewhere [Hall et al., 2007]. There are no reliable studies showing a relation between
                                      ethnicity and penile length [Adams, 1996]. There are some data on interethnic differences in
                                      the lower limit of penile length in newborns [Cheng and Chanoine, 2001]. A short penis
                                      should be differentiated from an inconspicuous penis, for instance due to excessive
                                      suprapubic fat (“buried”) [Bergeson et al., 1993]. Micropenis (or small penis) is sometimes
                                      used as a bundled term for short and narrow penis. We recommend that the term not be used
                                      in this way and that narrowness be coded separately. We also recognize that shortness of a
Author Manuscript




                                      penis is defined by some subspecialists as penile length more than 2.5 SD below the mean.

                                      Synonym: Micropenis

                                      Replaces: Penis, hypoplastic; Penis, hypotrophic; Penis, small Penis, small: Not defined as
                                      this is a bundled term encompassing both Short penis and Narrow penis.

                       Penis, Torsion of the
                                      Definition: Rotated position of the glans, with or without the penile shaft, of 30 degrees or
                                      more (Fig. 20). objective

                                      Comments: Penile torsion is defined traditionally as being between 30 and 180 degrees
                                      rotation [Montag and Palmer, 2011]. Penile torsion is usually counter clockwise and is often
Author Manuscript




                                      associated with Chordee and Hypospadias, which should be coded separately.

                       Penis, Webbed
                                      Definition: Ventral skinfold extending from penis to scrotum (Fig. 21). objective

                                      Comments: The distal limit of the skinfold can be located on the penile shaft or the tip of
                                      the penis. Webbing has been subclassified into a primary form and secondary form (for



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 10


                                      instance after circumcision) [El-Koutby and Amin el Gohary, 2010] and may be
Author Manuscript




                                      accompanied by Chordee, which should be coded separately.

                       Penis, Wide
                                      Definition: Distance between left and right side of the flaccid penis at the attachment to the
                                      skin above the pubic symphysis more than 2 SD above the mean for age (Fig. 22). objective
                                      OR

                                      Circumference of the flaccid penis more than 2 SD above the mean for age. objective OR

                                      Apparently increased distance for age between the left and right side of the flaccid penis at
                                      the attachment to the skin above the pubic symphysis. subjective

                                      Comments: Normal values for penile width only exist for newborns [Cheng and Chanoine,
Author Manuscript




                                      2001] and adults [Schneider et al., 2001]. Alternatively penile circumference can be
                                      measured, as normal values are available at all ages [Damon et al., 1990]. Note the site
                                      ofmeasurement (base; mid-shaft; under glans) may differ in the various studies [Ajmani et
                                      al., 1985; Ponchietti et al., 2001; Cinaz et al., 2012]. It is important that the measurement
                                      site be consistent with that of the published norms.

                       Penoscrotal transposition
                                      Definition: Positioning of the scrotum superior to the penis (Fig. 23). objective

                                      Comments: The base of the penis is entirely covered by the scrotum, which may be Bifid. If
                                      so, this should then be coded separately. If only part of the scrotum is located superior to the
                                      penis, the term Overriding scrotum is used instead.
Author Manuscript




                                      Synonyms: Prepenile scrotum

                                      Replaces: Doughnut scrotum

                                      Polyorchidism: See Testis, supernumerary

                                      Pubic hair, hypotrichosis of: See Pubic hair, sparse

                       Pubic hair, Sparse
                                      Definition: Apparently decreased number of hairs per unit area relative to the pubertal
                                      development as judged by other components of pubertal maturity (Fig. 24) subjective

                                      Comments: (Pubic) hypotrichosis should not be used as a synonym as, formally, it means
Author Manuscript




                                      underdevelopment of the hair. No normal values for the number of hairs per unit area exist.

                                      Replaces: Pubic hair, thinning; Pubic hair, thin; Pubic hypotrichosis

                                      Pubic hair, thin(ning): See Pubic hair, sparse




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 11


                       Scrotum, Absent
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Absence of scrotal sac (Fig. 25). objective

                                      Comments: Both the sac and rugae are absent. This finding may be accompanied by an
                                      (Apparently) absent testis and Cryptorchidism [Janoff and Skoog, 2005], which should be
                                      coded separately.

                       Scrotum, Accessory
                                      Definition: Additional scrotum, or part of a scrotum in an abnormal location (Fig. 26).
                                      objective

                                      Comments: An accessory scrotum is typically located on the perineum, frequently
                                      associated with perineal lipoma, and occasionally with Hypospadias or Bifid penis, which
                                      should be coded separately.
Author Manuscript




                       Scrotum, Bifid
                                      Definition: Midline indentation or cleft of the scrotum (Fig. 27). objective

                                      Comments:Atestis may or may not be present in each half of the scrotum.

                                      Scrotum, doughnut: See Penoscrotal transposition

                       Scrotum, Ectopic
                                      Definition: Scrotum in a position other than the usual position inferior to the base of the
                                      penis (Fig. 28). objective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: This term is distinguished from Accessory scrotum, as there is no significant
                                      scrotal tissue in the normal position in ectopic scrotum. This definition excludes the finding
                                      of Penoscrotal transposition or Overriding scrotum. Usually the scrotum is split and there
                                      is unilateral ectopia. The ectopic scrotum is typically located supra-inguinally, but may be
                                      located elsewhere such as on the upper thigh. A testis is commonly present in the ectopic
                                      scrotum. Ectopic scrotum can be accompanied by Chordee or Bifid penis [Hoar et al.,
                                      1998], which should be coded separately, and by renal and non-urogenital malformations

                                      Scrotum, hypoplastic: See Scrotum, small

                                      Scrotum, hypotrophic: See Scrotum, small

                                      Scrotum, Overriding: See Scrotum, shawl
Author Manuscript




                                      Scrotum, prepenile: See Penoscrotal transposition

                       Scrotum, Shawl
                                      Definition: Superior margin of the scrotum superior to the base of the penis (Fig. 29).
                                      Subjective




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 12


                                      Comments: A congenital overriding scrotum may disappear with growth and development,
Author Manuscript




                                      especially during puberty. If the entire scrotum is located superior to the penis, the term
                                      Penoscrotal transposition is used instead.

                                      Synonym: Overriding scrotum

                       Scrotum, Small
                                      Definition: Apparently small scrotum for age (Fig. 30). subjective

                                      Comments: A small scrotum is often accompanied by Cryptorchidism which should be
                                      coded separately. The size of the scrotum is dependent on the ambient temperature: a low
                                      temperature may cause the testes to retract, leading to the false impression of a small
                                      scrotum.
Author Manuscript




                                      Synonym: Scrotum, underdeveloped

                                      Replaces: Scrotum, hypotrophic; Scrotum, hypoplastic

                                      Scrotum, underdeveloped: See Scrotum, small

                       Testis, (Apparently) Absent
                                      Definition: Testis not palpable in the scrotum or inguinal canal.objective

                                      Comments: Absence can be congenital or not (vanishing testis). Definitive assessment can
                                      only be made by imaging or surgical studies, in order to exclude an intra-abdominal testis,
                                      which should be coded as Cryptorchidism. True absence of a testis can be difficult to prove.
                                      Anorchia is true absence of both testes, and can only be determined by imaging or surgical
Author Manuscript




                                      studies.

                                      Testis, enlarged: See Testis, large

                                      Testis, hyperplastic: See Testis, large

                                      Testis, hypertrophic: See Testis, large

                                      Testis, hypoplastic: See Testis, small

                                      Testis, hypotrophic: See Testis, small

                       Testis, Large
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Size of the testis more than 2 SD above the mean for age (Fig. 31). objective OR

                                      Apparently increased size of the testis for age. subjective

                                      Comments: Details on measurement of the testis can be found elsewhere [Hall et al., 2007].
                                      This is in fact a bundled term indicating an increase in testis length and width but is retained
                                      here because of its utility and the availability of objective normal values.



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                          Page 13


                                      Synonym: Macro-orchidism; Testis, overdeveloped
Author Manuscript




                                      Replaces: Testis, hyperplastic; Testis, hypertrophic, Testis enlarged

                                      Testis, overdeveloped: See Testis, large

                       Testis, Small
                                      Definition: Size of the testis more than 2 SD below the mean for age (Fig. 32). objective OR

                                      Apparently decreased size of the testis for age. subjective

                                      Comments: Details on measurement of the testis can be found elsewhere [Hall et al., 2007].

                                      Synonym: Testis, underdeveloped
Author Manuscript




                                      Replaces: Testis, hypoplastic; Testis, hypotrophic

                       Testis, Supernumerary
                                      Definition: More than two testes present in a hemi-scrotum or one inguinal canal (Fig. 33).
                                      objective

                                      Comments: Urologists use a subclassification of supernumerary testes [Bergholz and
                                      Wenke, 2009]. A supernumerary testis may reside in the abdomen, but this is not included in
                                      the present definition as it cannot be determined by physical examination. A supernumerary
                                      testis can be difficult to distinguish from a large epididymis. Triorchidism is sometimes used
                                      to describe a single supernumerary testis.
Author Manuscript




                                      Synonym: Polyorchidism

                                      Testis, underdeveloped: See Testis, small

                                      Testis, undescended: See Cryptorchidism

                       FEMALE EXTERNAL GENITALIA
                       Anatomy of the Female External Genitalia
                                      Normal anatomy of the female external genitalia is shown in Figure 34. Some anatomical
                                      landmarks deserve specific mention as these are not always used consistently.

                                      Labia majora: Two relatively broad soft tissue skin-covered swellings running alongside
                                      one another inferoposteriorly, in close proximity anteriorly at the mons pubis (sometimes
Author Manuscript




                                      called anterior commissure) and joining at the posterior commissure. They encircle the
                                      vulval vestibule, which contains the urethra and vagina. In young girls the skin is smooth
                                      and only slightly hyperpigmented, but the skin gradually undergoes further
                                      hyperpigmentation, hair growth and rugae formation. The inner part is covered by thin skin
                                      and mucous membrane and contains many sebaceous glands.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                              Page 14


                                      Labia minora: Two relatively narrow, hairless soft tissue swellings medial to the labia
Author Manuscript




                                      majora, covered with mucous membranes, running inferoposteriorly from the base of the
                                      clitoris to fuse posteriorly at the fourchette. There is marked variation in size of the labia
                                      minora, and, in postpubertal females, they often protrude beyond the labia majora.

                                      Interlabial sulci: the regions between the inner parts of the labia majora and outer parts of
                                      the labia minora.

                                      Clitoris: Cap-shaped organ supero-anterior to the entrance of the vagina, partly covered by a
                                      foreskin (hood). The size of the clitoris depends on whether it is erect or flaccid.

                                      Clitoral foreskin (hood ): Skin fold overriding and partially covering the glans of the
                                      clitoris and inferioposteriorly continuous with the labia minora.

                                      Clitoral frenula: Small elastic tissue folds covered by mucous membranes running from the
Author Manuscript




                                      glans of the clitoris to the labia minora.

                                      Hymen: Epithelial fold partly covering the inferior opening of the vagina. The virginal
                                      hymen has an opening that is variable in size, shape, and position (Fig. 35).

                                      Vagina: Hollow organ ending inferiorly at the vulval vestibule (introitus) between the labia
                                      minora, and superiorly at the cervix of the uterus. The vagina is collapsed most of the time.

                                      Vulva: Region delimited by the labia majora and containing the labia minora, clitoris,
                                      urethral meatus, and introitus. The vulval vestibule (introitus) is the region between the labia
                                      minora.

                       Puberty
Author Manuscript




                                      The timing of puberty varies greatly in the general population and is influenced by genetic
                                      and environmental factors [Gajdon et al., 2009]. In evaluating the pubertal development,
                                      ethnic background and intra-familial variation should be taken into account. Tanner stages
                                      are used to score pubertal development [Marshall and Tanner, 1969; Tanner, 1986]. In
                                      females the stages are determined by the size of the breasts and nipples, pigmentation and
                                      rugae formation of the labia, and pubic and axillary hair growth (Fig. 36). As each of these
                                      components is defined here separately, the pubertal stages are not discussed in further detail.

                       Measurements of the Female External Genitalia
                                      Measurement of the clitoris is the only measurement of female external genitalia commonly
                                      used in the clinic. Measurements of the clitoris are possible using sliding calipers, or a
Author Manuscript




                                      straight-edged plastic ruler. Reliability of measurements using a tape measure is poor.
                                      Length is measured from the base of the clitoris at the pubic symphysis to the tip without
                                      including the foreskin. Fat pads at the base of the clitoris influence this measurement and the
                                      ruler should be pressing against the pubic ramus. The reader is referred to the Handbook of
                                      Normal Physical Measurements [Hall et al., 2007] for detailed descriptions of measurement
                                      techniques and growth standards. Except for pubertal developmental stages growth
                                      standards are provided for Caucasians of Northern European origin only.



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                               Page 15


                       Anatomical Variation
Author Manuscript




                                      Anomalies of the female external genitalia may be classified into quantitative (objective or
                                      anthropometric) traits and qualitative (subjective or categorical) features:

                                          1.   Variations in length and width: large clitoris; small clitoris; absent labia majora;
                                               absent labia minora; large labia majora; small labia majora; prominent labia
                                               minora.

                                          2.   Variations in shape, number, or position: bifid clitoris; duplicated clitoris; fused
                                               labia minora; epispadias; hypospadias; atretic vaginal opening; septated vagina.

                                          3.   Variations in skin manifestations: freckled genitalia; hyperpigmented genitalia;
                                               hypopigmented genitalia; exaggerated rugosity of the labia majora; sparse pubic
                                               hair.
Author Manuscript




                                      The various features are listed alphabetically. If a feature is indicated in bold-italics, the
                                      feature is listed and a definition is available. The terms are alphabetized based on the
                                      physical feature, not the modifier.

                                      Investigating the genitalia should always be performed with the observed person in a relaxed
                                      position. The presence of a nurse or parent is advisable. Small children are best investigated
                                      in their parent’s lap. Repeated genital examinations may be embarrassing for the subject
                                      [Lee et al., 2006] and should be performed only when indicated.

                       DEFINITIONS
                       Clitoris, Bifid
                                      Definition: Two clitorides located side by side (Fig. 37). objective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: The word bifid indicates the presence of a split clitoris, as opposed to a
                                      supernumerary clitoris, which could be described as Duplicated clitoris. A bifid clitoris is
                                      almost invariably accompanied by Epispadias, which should be coded separately.

                       Clitoris, Duplicated
                                      Definition: A supernumerary clitoris (Fig. 38) objective

                                      Comments: A duplicated clitoris is much less common than a Bifid clitoris, which should
                                      be considered first in most cases [Kurth, 1958].

                                      Synonym: Clitoris, supernumerary
Author Manuscript




                                      Clitoris, hyperplastic: See Clitoris, large

                                      Clitoris, hypertrophic: See Clitoris, large

                                      Clitoris, hypoplastic: See Clitoris, small

                                      Clitoris, hypotrophic: See Clitoris, small




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                          Page 16


                       Clitoris, Large
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Clitoral length more than 2 SD above the mean for age (Fig. 39). objective OR

                                      Apparently increased length of the clitoris for age. subjective

                                      Comments: Clitoral length is the distance between the attachment of the clitoris anterior to
                                      the pubic bone and tip of the clitoris. Details on measurement of the clitoris can be found
                                      elsewhere [Oberfield et al., 1989; Litwin et al., 1991; Sane and Pescovitz, 1992; Verkauf et
                                      al., 1992; Phillip et al., 1996; Akbiyik and Kutlu, 2010]. Subjective assessment of clitoral
                                      size can be confounded by Small labia majora and therefore objective assessment is
                                      preferred. The word “large” literally indicates an increase in bothwidth and length, but in
                                      practice only the length of the clitoris is measured.

                                      Synonym: Clitoromegaly; Clitoris, overdeveloped; Clitoris, long
Author Manuscript




                                      Replaces: Clitoris, hypertrophic; Clitoris, hyperplastic

                                      Clitoris, long: See Clitoris, large

                                      Clitoris, overdeveloped: See Clitoris, large

                       Clitoris, Small
                                      Definition: Clitoral length more than 2 SD below the mean for age (Fig. 40). objective OR

                                      Apparently decreased length of the clitoris for age. subjective

                                      Comments: Clitoral length is the distance between the attachment of the clitoris anterior to
Author Manuscript




                                      the pubic bone and tip of the clitoris. Details on measurement of the clitoris can be found
                                      elsewhere [Oberfield et al., 1989; Litwin et al., 1991; Sane and Pescovitz, 1992; Verkauf et
                                      al., 1992; Phillip et al., 1996; Akbiyik and Kutlu, 2010]. Subjective assessment of clitoral
                                      size can be confounded by obesity and therefore objective assessment is preferred. The word
                                      small literally indicates a decrease in both width and length, but in practice only the length
                                      of the clitoris is measured.

                                      Synonym: Clitoris, underdeveloped

                                      Replaces: Clitoris, hypotrophic; Clitoris, hypoplastic

                                      Clitoris, supernumerary: See Clitoris, duplicated
Author Manuscript




                                      Clitoris, underdeveloped: See Clitoris, small

                                      Clitoromegaly: See Clitoris, large

                       Epispadias
                                      Definition:Dorsalplacementof the urethral opening (Fig. 37). objective




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                           Page 17


                                      Comments: In a phenotypic female, epispadias may be accompanied by a Bifid clitoris,
Author Manuscript




                                      which should be coded separately. Epispadias is a frequent component of Bladder
                                      exstrophy, but should be coded separately.

                       Genitalia, Ambiguous
                                      Definition: External genitalia without typical male or female appearance (Fig. 9). subjective

                                      Comments: Note that this term can include or combine variations in size and shape, with
                                      partial or complete absence of structures. It is preferable to describe the individual
                                      components, which are defined below. It is nonetheless a widely used bundled term and as
                                      such is retained here (for the definition of a “bundled term” see Allanson et al. [2009a]).

                                      Synonym: Intersex genitalia
Author Manuscript




                                      Genitalia, ephelides: See Genitalia, freckled

                       Genitalia, Freckled
                                      Definition: One or more brown punctate macules on the skin of the genitalia (Fig. 10).
                                      objective

                                      Comments: This should be differentiated from Hyperpigmented genitalia in which an area
                                      larger than a freckle is/the complete external genitalia are hyperpigmented. The description
                                      should be qualified by a description of the affected part(s).

                                      Synonym: Genitalia, ephelides

                       Genitalia, Hyperpigmented
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Localized or generalized increased genital pigmentation (Fig. 11). subjective

                                      Comments: This is an assessment of the relative pigmentation of the genitalia compared to
                                      the overall pigmentation of the individual. Hyperpigmentation can affect other parts of the
                                      body or be restricted to the genitalia. Genital hyperpigmentation can be generalized or
                                      localized. It should be differentiated from Freckled genitalia in which one or more small,
                                      focal areas of hyperpigmentation are present. Localized hyperpigmentation can be
                                      objectively determined due to the difference from the immediate surrounding tissue color,
                                      while generalized hyperpigmentation may be more difficult to determine and is therefore a
                                      subjective manifestation. If the finding is localized, the description should be appended with
                                      a description of the affected part(s).
Author Manuscript




                       Genitalia, Hypopigmented
                                      Definition: Localized or generalized decreased genital pigmentation (Fig. 12). subjective

                                      Comments: This is an assessment of the relative pigmentation of the genitalia compared to
                                      the overall pigmentation of the individual. Hypopigmentation can affect other parts of the
                                      body or be restricted to the genitalia. Genital hypopigmentation can be generalized or
                                      localized. Localized hypopigmentation can be objectively determined due to the difference


                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                           Page 18


                                      from the immediate surrounding tissue color, while generalized hypopigmentation may be
Author Manuscript




                                      more difficult to determine and is therefore a subjective manifestation.

                                      Genitalia, intersex: See Genitalia, ambiguous

                       Hypospadias
                                      Definition: Urethral meatus located on the anterior vaginal wall (Fig. 41). objective

                                      Comments: The location of the meatus can be from just above the introitus up to deep into
                                      the vagina near the cervix (fornix). Female hypospadias can be associated with Bladder
                                      exstrophy, which should be coded separately

                       Labia Majora, Absent
                                      Definition: No discernable labia majora (Fig. 42). subjective
Author Manuscript




                                      Comments: None of the three attributes of labia majora is present: no tissue mass, no
                                      hyperpigmentation, no rugae formation.

                                      Labia majora, hyperplastic: See Labia majora, large

                                      Labia majora, hypertrophic: See Labia majora, large

                                      Labia majora, hypoplastic: See Labia majora, small

                                      Labia majora, hypotrophic: See Labia majora, small

                       Labia Majora, Large
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Increased volume of the labia majora (Fig. 43). subjective

                                      Comments: Large labia majora may be accompanied by Hyperpigmented genitalia or
                                      Exaggerated rugosity of the labia majora, which should be coded separately.

                                      Synonym: Labia majora, overdeveloped

                                      Replaces: Labia majora, hypertrophic; Labia majora, hyperplastic

                       Labia Majora, Exaggerated Rugosity of the
                                      Definition: Marked rugae formation of the skin of the labia majora (Fig. 44). subjective

                                      Comments: Some rugae formation is typically found on the labia majora, but less than on
Author Manuscript




                                      the scrotum.

                                      Replaces: Scrotum-like labia majora

                                      Labia majora, overdeveloped: See Labia majora, large

                                      Labia majora, scrotum-like: See Labia majora, exaggerated rugosity of the




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                             Page 19


                       Labia Majora, Small
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Apparently decreased soft tissue volume of the labia majora (Fig. 45). subjective

                                      Comments: The hyperpigmentation and mild rugae formation of the labia majora may or
                                      may not be decreased.

                                      Synonym: Labia majora, underdeveloped

                                      Labia majora, underdeveloped: See Labia majora, small

                       Labia Minora, Absent
                                      Definition: No recognizable soft tissue folds medial to the labia majora (Fig. 46). subjective

                       Labia Minora, Fused
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Lack of separation of the labia minora over part or all of their length (Fig. 47).
                                      Objective

                                      Comments: Fusion is not infrequent in newborn girls and separation may occur
                                      spontaneously in the first few years of life.

                       Labia Minora, Prominent
                                      Definition: Apparent increase in volume of the labia minora (Fig. 48). subjective

                                      Comments: Variation in the size of labia minora is considerable. This is in fact a bundled
                                      term as itmay indicate an increase of length, width and/or thickness, but it is useful in
                                      practice and therefore kept here. Labia minora may appear prominent in the presence of
Author Manuscript




                                      Small labia majora .

                                      Pubic hair, hypotrichosis: See Pubic hair, sparse

                       Pubic hair, Sparse
                                      Definition: Apparently decreased number of hairs per unit area relative to the pubertal
                                      development as judged by other components of pubertal maturity (Fig. 49) subjective

                                      Comments: (Pubic) hypotrichosis should not be used as a synonym as, formally, it means
                                      underdevelopment of the hair. No normal values for the number of hairs per unit area exist.

                                      Replaces: Pubic hair, thinning; Pubic hair, thin; Pubic hypotrichosis
Author Manuscript




                                      Pubic hair, thin(ning): See Pubic hair, sparse

                       Vagina, Atretic Opening of the
                                      Definition: No discernable entrance to the vagina on the vulva (Fig. 50). Objective

                                      Comments: An atretic opening may occur independent of atresia of the remainder of the
                                      vagina, which needs further radiological and/or surgical investigations to diagnose.



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                                           Page 20


                       Vagina, Septated
Author Manuscript




                                      Definition: Apparent lateral division of the vagina by a thin tissue wall visible at the
                                      introitus (Fig. 51). objective

                                      Comments: The term does not indicate the pathogenetic mechanism and does not
                                      distinguish a double vagina from a septum within a single vagina. Neither a transverse
                                      vaginal septum nor a septum present in the deeper two-thirds of the vagina can be assessed
                                      on external physical examination.


                       ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                      We are pleased to thank Astrid Sibbes, Medical Photography and Illustration, Academic Medical Centre,
                                      Amsterdam for all drawings, and Dr. F.B. Lammes, pediatric gynecologist, for making his photography collection
                                      available to us. E.V. is partially funded by the DSD Translational Research Network (NIH grant # 1 R01
                                      HD068138), and L.G.B. is supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Human Genome
Author Manuscript




                                      Research Institute.

                                      Grant sponsor: NIH; Grant number: # 1 R01 HD068138; Grant sponsor: Intramural Research Program of the
                                      National Human Genome Research Institute.


                       REFERENCES
                                      Adams, MV. The multicultural imagination: Race, color, and the unconscious. London: Routledge;
                                        1996. p. 164
                                      Ajmani ML, Jain SP, Saxena SK. Anthropometric study of male external genitalia of 320 healthy
                                        Nigerian adults. Anthropol Anz. 1985; 43:179–186. [PubMed: 4026241]
                                      Akbiyik F, Kutlu AO. External genital proportions in prepubertal girls:Amorphometric reference for
                                        female genitoplasty. J Urol. 2010; 184:1476–1481. [PubMed: 20727539]
                                      Allanson JE, Biesecker LG, Carey JC, Hennekam RCM. Elements of morphology: Introduction. Am J
                                        Med Genet Part A. 2009a; 149A:2–5. [PubMed: 19127575]
Author Manuscript




                                      Allanson JE, Cunniff C, Hoyme HE, McGaughan J, Muenke M, Neri G. Elements of morphology:
                                        Standard terminology for the head and face. Am J Med Genet Part A. 2009b; 149A:6–28. [PubMed:
                                        19125436]
                                      Atilgan D, Uluocak N, Erdemir F, Parlaktas BS. Female epispadias: A case report and review of the
                                        literature. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2009; 25:613–616. [PubMed: 19858041]
                                      Baskin, LS.; Duckett, JW. Hypospadias, in adult and pediatric urology. In: Gillenwater, J.; Grayhack,
                                        J.; Howards, S.; Mitchell, M., editors. Adult and pediatric urology. 4th edition. St. Louis: Mosby;
                                        1996.
                                      Bauer R, Kogan BA. Modern technique for penile torsion repair. J Urol. 2009; 182:286–291.
                                        [PubMed: 19450814]
                                      Bergeson PS, Hopkin RJ, Bailey RB, Mc Gill LC, Piatt JP. The inconspicuous penis. Pediatrics. 1993;
                                        92:794–799. [PubMed: 8233739]
                                      Bergholz R, Wenke K. Polyorchidism: A meta-analysis. J Urol. 2009; 182:2422–2427. [PubMed:
                                          19765760]
Author Manuscript




                                      Bhat A, Saxena R, Bhat MP, Dawan M, Saxena G. Female hypospadias with vaginal stones: A rare
                                          congenital anomaly. J Pediatr Urol. 2010; 7:70–74. [PubMed: 19394897]
                                      Biesecker LG, Aase JM, Clericuzio C, Gurrieri F, Temple IK, Toriello H. Elements of morphology:
                                          Standard terminology for the hands and feet. Am J Med Genet Part A. 2009; 149A:93–127.
                                          [PubMed: 19125433]
                                      Bologna RA, Noah TA, Nasrallah PF, McMahon DR. Chordee: Varied opinions and. treatments as
                                          documented in a survey of the American Academy of Pediatrics, Section of Urology. Urology.
                                          1999; 53:608–612. [PubMed: 10096392]




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                                  Page 21


                                      Carey JC, Cohen MM Jr, Curry CJR, Devriendt K, Holmes LB, Verloes A. Elements of morphology:
                                          Standard terminology for the lips, mouth and oral region. Am J Med Genet Part A. 2009; 149A:
Author Manuscript




                                          77–92. [PubMed: 19125428]
                                      Cheng PK, Chanoine JP. Should the definition of micropenis vary according to ethnicity? Horm Res.
                                          2001; 55:278–281. [PubMed: 11805431]
                                      Chibber PJ, Shah HN, Jain P, Yadav P. Male gender assignment in aphallia: A case report and review
                                          of the literature. Int Urol Nephrol. 2005; 37:317–319. [PubMed: 16142564]
                                      Cinaz P, Yeşilkaya E, Onganlar YH, Boyraz M, Bideci A, Camurdan O, Baki Karaoğlu A. Penile
                                          anthropometry of normal prepubertal boys in Turkey. Acta Paediatr. 2012; 101:e33–e36.
                                          [PubMed: 21682766]
                                      Damon V, Berlier P, Durozier B, François R. Study of the dimensions of the penis from birth to adult
                                          age and as a function of testicular volume. Pediatrie. 1990; 45:519–522. [PubMed: 2170931]
                                      Ebert AK, Reutter H, Ludwig M, Rösch WH. The extrophy–epispadias complex. Orphanet J Rare Dis.
                                          2009; 4:23. [PubMed: 19878548]
                                      El-Koutby M, Aminel Gohary M. Webbedpenis:Anew classification. J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg.
                                          2010; 15:50–52. [PubMed: 20975781]
Author Manuscript




                                      Ellsworth WA, Rizvi M, Lypka M, Gaon M, Smith B, Cohen B, Dinh T. Techniques for labia minora
                                          reduction: An algorithmic approach. Aesth Plast Surg. 2010; 34:105–110.
                                      Fathi K, Perovic S, Pinter A. Successful surgical correction of an extreme form of ectopic penis. J
                                          Pediatr Urol. 2010; 6:426–428. [PubMed: 20153699]
                                      Gajdon ZKZ, Hirschhorn JN, Palmert MR. What controls the timing of puberty? An update on
                                          progress from genetic investigation. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2009; 16:16–24.
                                          [PubMed: 19104234]
                                      Gardikis S, Kambouri K, Tsalkidis A, Angelidou M, Pitiakoudis M, Vaos G. Inguinal ectopic scrotum
                                          in a neonate: Case report and literature review. Pediatr Int. 2012; 54:575–576. [PubMed:
                                          22830552]
                                      Gucev Z, Castori M, Tasic V, Popjordanova N, Hasani A. A patient with unilateral tibial aplasia and
                                          accessory scrotum: A pure coincidence or nonfortuitous association? Case Report Med. 2010;
                                          2010:898636.
                                      Hall, JG.; Allanson, JA.; Gripp, K.; Slavotinek, A. Handbook of normal physical measurements. 2nd
Author Manuscript




                                          edition. New York: Oxford University Press; 2007.
                                      Hall BD, Graham JM Jr, Cassidy SB, Opitz JM. Elements of morphology: Standard terminology for
                                          the periorbital region. Am J Med Genet Part A. 2009; 149A:29–39. [PubMed: 19125427]
                                      Hennekam RCM, Cormier-Daire V, Hall JG, Méhes K, Patton M, Stevenson RE. Elements of
                                          morphology: Standard terminology for the nose and philtrum. Am J Med Genet Part A. 2009;
                                          149A:61–76. [PubMed: 19152422]
                                      Hoar RM, Calvano CJ, Reddy PP, Bauer SB, Mandell J. Unilateral suprainguinal ectopic scrotum. The
                                          role of the gubernaculum in the formation of an ectopic scrotum. Teratology. 1998; 57:54–59.
                                      Hunter A, Frias J, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Hughes H, Jones K, Wilson L. Elements of morphology:
                                          Standard terminology for the ear. Am J Med Genet Part A. 2009; 149A:40–60. [PubMed:
                                          19152421]
                                      Janoff DM, Skoog SJ. Congenital scrotal agenesis: Description of a rare anomaly and management
                                          strategies. J Urol. 2005; 173:589–591. [PubMed: 15643265]
                                      Keckler S, Stephany HA, Spilde TL, Snyder CL. Isolated diphallia: Case report and literature review.
                                          Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2009; 19:254–255. [PubMed: 19431105]
Author Manuscript




                                      Kulshreshtha B, Khadgawat R, Eunice M, Ammini AC. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: Results of
                                          medical therapy on appearance of external genitalia. J Pediatr Urol. 2010; 6:555–559. [PubMed:
                                          20117057]
                                      Kurth ME. Incomplete duplication of the female external genitalia or double clitoris. Am J Surg. 1958;
                                          96:596–599. [PubMed: 13571558]
                                      Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, Hughes IA. Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders.
                                          International Consensus Conference on Intersex. Pediatrics. 2006; 118:e488–e500. [PubMed:
                                          16882788]



                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                                   Page 22


                                      Litwin A, Aitkin I, Merlob P. Clitoral length assessment in newborn infants of 30 to 41 weeks
                                          gestational age. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1991; 38:209–212. [PubMed: 2007446]
Author Manuscript




                                      Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in girls. Arch Dis Child. 1969;
                                          44:291–303. [PubMed: 5785179]
                                      Montag S, Palmer LS. Abnormalities of penile curvature: Chordee and penile torsion. Sci World J.
                                          2011; 11:1470–1478.
                                      Oberfield SE, Mondok A, Shahrivar F, Klein JF, Levine LS. Clitoral size in full-term infants. Am J
                                          Perinatol. 1989; 6:453–454. [PubMed: 2789544]
                                      Orkiszewski M. A standardized classification of hypospadias. J Pediatr Urol. 2012; 8:410–414.
                                          [PubMed: 21968448]
                                      Phillip M, De Boer C, Pilpel D, Karplus M, Sofer S. Clitoral and penile sizes of full term newborns in
                                          two different ethnic groups. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1996; 9:175–179. [PubMed: 8887140]
                                      Ponchietti R, Mondaini N, Bonafé M, Di Loro F, Biscioni S, Masieri L. Penile length and
                                          circumference: A study on 3,300 young Italian males. Eur Urol. 2001; 39:183–186. [PubMed:
                                          11223678]
                                      Rattan KN, Kajal P, Pathak M, Kadian YS, Gupta R. Aphallia: Experience with 3 cases. J Pediatr
Author Manuscript




                                          Surg. 2010; 45:e13–e16. [PubMed: 20105566]
                                      Roth JK Jr, Marshall RH, Angel JR, Daftary M, Lewis RW. Congenital absence of penis. Urology.
                                          1981; 17:579–583. [PubMed: 7245449]
                                      Sadeghipour RS, Esmailzadehha N. Aposthia: A case report. J Pediatr Surg. 2010; 45:317–319.
                                      Sane K, Pescovitz OH. The clitoral index: A determination of clitoral size in normal girls and in girls
                                          with abnormal sexual development. J Pediatr. 1992; 120:264–266. [PubMed: 1735824]
                                      Schneider T, Sperling H, Lümmen G, Syllwasschy J, Rübben H. Does penile size in younger men
                                          cause problems in condom use? A prospective measurement of penile dimensions in 111 young
                                          and 32 older men. Urology. 2001; 57:314–318. [PubMed: 11182344]
                                      Solanki NS, Tejero-Trujeque R, Stevens-King A, Malata CM. Aesthetic and functional reduction of
                                          the labia minora using the Maas and Hage technique. J Plast Reconstr Aesth Surg. 2010; 63:1181–
                                          1185.
                                      Tanner JM. Normal growth and techniques of growth assessment. Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1986;
                                          15:411–451. [PubMed: 3533329]
Author Manuscript




                                      Verkauf BS, Von Thron J, O’Brien WF. Clitoral size in normal women. Obstet Gynecol. 1992; 80:41–
                                          44. [PubMed: 1603495]
                                      Wang H, Guo K, Wang J, Liu L, Li F. Aphallia in an adult male with 46, XY karyotype. Int J Urol.
                                          2011; 18:540–542. [PubMed: 21615524]
                                      Yalcinkaya S, Sahin C, Sahin AF. Polyorchidism: Sonographic and magnetic resonance imaging
                                          findings. Can Urol Assoc J. 2011; 5:e84–e86. [PubMed: 21989176]
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                     Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 1.
                                      Anatomy of external male genitalia. a: Anterior overview. b: Inferior overview.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                       Page 24
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 2.
Author Manuscript




                                      Anatomy of external male genitalia. a: Anterior and side view of the penis with the
                                      preputium removed. b: Detailed side and posterior view of the penis with the preputium
                                      removed.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 25
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 3.
Author Manuscript




                                      Puberty stages males according to Tanner [1986].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 26
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 4.
                                      Prader orchidometer.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                      Page 27
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 5.
Author Manuscript




                                      Bladder exstrophia. Courtesy of Dr. Anne-Karoline Ebert. Reprinted with permission from
                                      Ebert et al. [2009].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                   Page 28
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 6.
                                      Chordee. Courtesy of Dr. Montasser El-Koutby. Reprinted with permission from El-Koutby
                                      and El Gohary [2010].
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                      Page 29
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 7.
Author Manuscript




                                      Epispadias. Courtesy of Dr. Anne-Karoline Ebert. Reprinted with permission from Ebert et
                                      al. [2009].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                     Page 30
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 8.
                                      Foreskin, absence. Courtesy of Dr. S. Sadeghipour and Dr. N. Esmailzadehha. Reprinted
                                      with permission from Sadeghipour and Esmailzadehha [2010].
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 31
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 9.
                                      Ambiguous genitalia.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 32
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 10.
                                      Freckled genitalia.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                             Page 33
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 11.
                                      Hyperpigmented genitalia in males (left and middle) and female (right).
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                            Page 34
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 12.
                                      Hypopigmented genitalia in male (left) and females (middle and right).
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 35
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 13.
                                      Hydrocele.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                        Page 36
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 14.
                                      Various forms of hypospadias. There are various classification systems (see text).
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 37
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 15.
                                      Microphallus.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                        Page 38
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 16.
                                      Absent penis. Courtesy of Dr. Ruchi Gupta (panel A) and Dr. Li Fubiao (panel B). Panel A
                                      reprinted with permission from Rattan et al. [2010]. Panel B reprinted with permission from
                                      Wang et al. [2011].
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 39
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 17.
                                      Bifid penis.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 40
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 18.
                                      Long penis (in newborn children).
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                            Page 41
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 19.
                                      Short penis. Please note that on panel C the penis seems to be absent, but can be made
Author Manuscript




                                      visible in the same patient in panel D by pushing surrounding tissues backward.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                      Page 42
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 20.
Author Manuscript




                                      Torsion of the penis. Courtesy of Dr. Barry Kogan. Reprinted with permission from Bauer
                                      and Kogan [2009].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                      Page 43
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 21.
                                      Webbed penis. Panels B and C courtesy of Dr. Montasser El-Koutby. Reprinted with
                                      permission from El-Koutby and El Gohary [2010].
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 44
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 22.
                                      Wide penis (newborn child). Courtesy of Dr. Sheela Nampoothiri.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                        Page 45
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 23.
Author Manuscript




                                      Penoscrotal transposition. Courtesy of Dr. Trine Prescott and Dr. Kathrine Bj?rgo (panel A)
                                      and Dr Khaled Fathi (panel B). Panel B reprinted with permission from Fathi et al. [2010].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 46
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 24.
Author Manuscript




                                      Sparse pubic hair (in a pubertal male).




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 47
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 25.
Author Manuscript




                                      Absent scrotum.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                    Page 48
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 26.
Author Manuscript




                                      Accessory scrotum. Courtesy of Dr. Paval Ganesan (panel A) and Dr. Zoran Gucev (panel
                                      B). Panel B reprinted with permission from Gucev et al. [2010].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                       Page 49
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 27.
Author Manuscript




                                      Bifid scrotum. Note that in panels A and B the scrotum shows only a mild indentation and in
                                      panel C the scrotum is completely bifid.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                        Page 50
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 28.
Author Manuscript




                                      Ectopic scrotum (panel a courtesy of Dr. Zoran Gucev, panel b courtesy of Dr Stefanos
                                      Gardikis). Panel A reprinted with permission from Gucev et al. [2010]. Panel B reprinted
                                      with permission from Gardikis et al. [2012].
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                      Page 51
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 29.
                                      Shawl scrotum. Note only partly overriding scrotum in panel A and complete overriding in
                                      panel B.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 52
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 30.
Author Manuscript




                                      Small scrotum.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 53
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 31.
Author Manuscript




                                      Large testis.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 54
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 32.
Author Manuscript




                                      Small testis (in a pubertal boy).




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                        Page 55
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 33.
                                      Supernumerary testis (two testes in left hemiscrotum indicated by arrows). Courtesy of Dr.
                                      Ali Feyzullah S?ahin. Reprinted with permission from Yalcinkaya et al. [2011].
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 56
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 34.
Author Manuscript




                                      Anatomy of female external genitalia.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 57
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 35.
Author Manuscript




                                      Variation in opening of virginal hymen in newborns.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 58
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 36.
Author Manuscript




                                      Puberty stages females according to Tanner [1986].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                         Page 59
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 37.
Author Manuscript




                                      Bifid clitoris. Note the co-occurrence of epispadias. Courtesy of Dr. Anne-Karoline Ebert.
                                      Reprinted with permission from Ebert et al. [2009].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 60
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 38.
                                      Duplicated clitoris. Reprinted with permission from Kurth [1958].
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 61
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 39.
                                      Large clitoris.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 62
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 40.
Author Manuscript




                                      Small clitoris.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                        Page 63
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 41.
Author Manuscript




                                      Hypospadias (a catheter being in hypospadiac opening high in the anterior vaginal wall).
                                      Courtesy of Dr. Amilal Bhat. Reprinted with permission from Bhat et al. [2010].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 64
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 42.
                                      Absent labia majora.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                     Page 65
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 43.
Author Manuscript




                                      Large labia majora. Courtesy of Dr. Ariachery Ammini. Reprinted with permission from
                                      Kulshreshtha et al. [2010].




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                          Page 66
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 44.
                                      Labia majora with mild (a) and more marked (b) rugae formation. Note enlargement of
                                      clitoris as well in panel B. Panel a courtesy of Dr. Ariachery Ammini. Panel a reprinted with
                                      permission from Atilgan et al. [2009].
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                 Page 67
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 45.
                                      Small upper part (panels a and b) and lower part (panel C) of labia majora.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                          Page 68
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 46.
                                      Absent labia minora. Note this causes a seemingly large clitoris which is in fact of normal
                                      size.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 69
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 47.
                                      Fused labia minora. Courtesy of Dr. AKC Leung.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                                       Page 70
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 48.
                                      Prominent labia minora which is unilateral on the right panel. Panel a courtesy of Dr.
                                      Warren Ellsworth, panel b courtesy of Dr. Charles Malata. Panel a reprinted with permission
                                      from Ellsworth et al. [2010]. Panel B reprinted with permission from Solanki et al. [2010].
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 71
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 49.
Author Manuscript




                                      Sparse pubic hair (in a pubertal female).




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 72
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 50.
Author Manuscript




                                      Atretic opening of the vagina.




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
                    Hennekam et al.                                                                           Page 73
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                      FIG. 51.
                                      Septated vagina.
Author Manuscript




                                         Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
