                            NIH Public Access
                            Author Manuscript
                            Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 January 1.
                           Published in final edited form as:
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                            Am J Med Genet A. 2009 January ; 149A(1): 2–5. doi:10.1002/ajmg.a.32601.



                           Elements of Morphology: Introduction
                           Judith E Allansona, Leslie G Bieseckerb, John C Careyc, and Raoul CM Hennekamd

                           a Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada b National

                           Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,, Bethesda, Maryland, USA c
                           Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA d
                           Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital,
                           UCL, London, UK and Department of Paediatrics, Academic Medical Center, UVA, Amsterdam,
                           The Netherlands

                           Abstract
                                An international group of clinicians working in the field of dysmorphology has initiated the
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                standardization of terms used to describe human morphology. The goals are to standardize these
                                terms and reach consensus regarding their definitions. In this way, we will increase the utility of
                                descriptions of the human phenotype and facilitate reliable comparisons of findings among
                                patients. Discussions with other workers in dysmorphology and related fields, such as
                                developmental biology and molecular genetics, will become more precise. Here we describe the
                                general background of the project and the various issues we have tried to take into account in
                                defining the terms.


                           Keywords
                                nomenclature; definitions; morphology; dysmorphology; birth defects; malformations; minor
                                anomalies; common variants


                           Introduction
                                            This issue of the Journal contains six articles that describe the initial results of a project
                                            intended to develop accurate and clear definitions of terms for the craniofacies in general,
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            the major components of the face, and the hands and feet (Allanson et al., 2009; Biesecker et
                                            al, 2009; Carey et al., 2009; Hall et al., 2009; Hennekam et al., 2009; Hunter et al., 2009).
                                            These articles are the result of a significant amount of planning, organization, negotiation,
                                            review, and writing, while, at the same time, they are but a start.

                                            Dysmorphology evolved from a small nucleus of clinicians in the 1950s into a recognized
                                            and widely practiced discipline, and more recently has incorporated translational research
                                            into developmental biology, molecular genetics, and metabolic medicine. The terms that
                                            clinicians use to describe a body part have gradually evolved in a haphazard and
                                            uncoordinated manner, and have not been critically reviewed. Clinicians and researchers
                                            have always made comparisons among patients and syndromes, and in the last decade it has
                                            become increasingly possible and necessary to use clinical data for studies of etiology and
                                            pathogenesis, epidemiology, the isolation of causative gene mutations, and for evaluation of



                           Correspondence to: Dr RCM Hennekam, Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
                           WC1N 1EH, UK. Tel.: + 44 20 7905 2608; fax: + 44 20 7905 2832. E-mail: r.hennekam@ich.ucl.ac.uk.
                           Allanson et al.                                                                                             Page 2


                                             interventions. Therefore, we need to have uniform and internationally accepted terms to
                                             describe the human phenotype.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                              Organization of the Project
                                             Several years ago, after many informal discussions, we brought together an international
                                             group of clinicians working in the field of dysmorphology with the goal of standardizing this
                                             nomenclature. The participants were chosen for their knowledge of morphology, syndromes,
                                             and skills in syndrome delineation. Because we anticipated that the group would need to
                                             gather several times and we recognized financial constraints, we restricted the group to 34
                                             individuals and had to accept that many excellent colleagues could not be invited to join the
                                             project.

                                             Our original goal was to review, revise if necessary, and delineate definitions for all of the
                                             terms used in the London Dysmorphology Databases (n=683). However, recognizing the
                                             enormity of the task, we chose to begin the project with the cranium, the face and its
                                             features, and the hands and feet – the parts of the body that are often used in dysmorphology
                                             to describe patients and delineate syndromes.

                                             We set out to accomplish this work in six teams, each focused on a particular area of the
                                             human body. While much of our work has been carried out in small groups using electronic
                                             communication, we have met as a large group on two occasions: in Bethesda in December,
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             2005 (host: Leslie G Biesecker) and Rome in November, 2006 (hosts: Giovanni Neri and
                                             Fiorella Gurrieri) (Fig. 1). These face-to-face meetings were invaluable in expediting the
                                             process and allowing discussion of principles and initial points of disagreement, of which
                                             there were many.

                              Attributes of the Terms
                                             For each feature we provide a preferred term and use a standard format to provide a
                                             definition and description of how to observe and measure (where possible) the feature. For
                                             many of the terms, both subjective and objective definitions of terms are provided. When an
                                             objective assessment can be made, this is always preferable to the subjective. A few terms
                                             have multiple alternative objective definitions. Typically, this reflects multiple sets of norms
                                             for a quantitative trait and, in such cases, each definition is equally valid.

                                             Our aim is to formalize, unify, and standardize the approach to clinical assessment in the
                                             hope that it will become generally accepted and applied. For each term we have added
                                             relevant comments and synonyms, and indicated terms that should no longer be used. Most
                                             clinicians have at least a few terms of which they are inordinately fond. In spite of these
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             personal biases, our goal is to make a universal language to describe morphology. We have
                                             avoided terms that indicate pathogenesis or an active process; we aspired to simply describe
                                             what can be observed.

                                             We recognize that a number of terms in common usage may be considered pejorative in
                                             some or all cultures. We have created alternative descriptors in these cases, even if they are
                                             not in current common usage. The definitions are intended to be applied broadly, thus we
                                             avoided obscure terms, flowery language, etc. We have tried to apply a standard format that
                                             would be readily understandable by a medical student who has completed training in
                                             physical diagnosis.

                                             In addition to standardized terms and definitions, we aimed to provide clear illustrations of
                                             each feature. We have used our joint collection of pictures and the extensive Robert J.
                                             Gorlin slide collection which is the series of digitalized slides that Prof Gorlin gathered


                                               Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 January 1.
                           Allanson et al.                                                                                             Page 3


                                             during his long career available to one of us (RCMH). It is important that readers recognize
                                             that a given photograph may include multiple findings. Where possible, photographs have
                                             been cropped to avoid showing other signs and to emphasize one feature. We tried to show
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             variable expression of the features, both mild and severe.

                                             The terms are intended for clinical evaluation of the individual using observation, palpation,
                                             or simple morphometric techniques (such as measuring of inner canthal distance). We
                                             provide basic general principles for measuring each of the body parts, and indicate in the
                                             definitions if a reliable measurement is possible and if norms are available. However,
                                             extensive description of morphometric techniques is outside the scope of this effort and
                                             readers should consult authoritative sources for this information (Farkas L Anthropometry of
                                             the Head and Face in Medicine. Elsevier, 1981; and Hall JG, Allanson JE, Gripp KW,
                                             Slavotinek AM. Handbook of Physical Measurements, 2nd Edition, OUP, 2007). We have
                                             referenced the most important standards for each of the body parts. The present project was
                                             not intended to generate new normative data, novel objective assessment techniques, or
                                             novel morphologic features. We acknowledge a tremendous lack of data on ethnic groups
                                             other than Caucasian, and we encourage efforts to address this deficiency.

                                             The use of radiographs as part of morphologic assessments (such as a hand radiograph to
                                             distinguish a broad thumb from a bifid thumb) was controversial in the group. Although we
                                             decided not to use radiographic findings in the definitions and only use data obtained
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             through surface examination, this issue will need to be re-evaluated.

                                             We provide only limited and general anatomical background and have avoided more
                                             substantive explanations and reviews of what is known (or hypothesized) about the
                                             mechanism of the genesis of the physical findings. This is for several reasons. First, other
                                             excellent texts provide thorough discussions of this topic (Sadler TW, Langman J
                                             Langman's Medical Embryology 8th Ed, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000; Moore KL,
                                             Dalley AF Clinical Oriented Anatomy, 5th Ed, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005).
                                             Second, our understanding of the genesis of an anatomical finding is likely to change over
                                             time, and we did not want the definitions to change should this occur. Third, the current
                                             debate about the proposed genesis of many of the findings could detract from the intended
                                             goals of this work.

                                             We emphasize that the terms deliberately avoid any commentary about normal or abnormal
                                             status, even when this is obvious (such as a proboscis). This is because many morphological
                                             findings are commonly observed as isolated features in the normal population. There can
                                             also be a remarkable difference in frequency of a finding among various populations. The
                                             objectively determined findings are by definition abnormal in a normative, statistical sense.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             However, even in these cases, the individual should simply be considered to have the
                                             feature, and no judgment of normal or abnormal status is made.

                                             We have elected not to provide differential diagnoses for the features as such lists could be
                                             very long or incomplete. Syndromes are typically diagnosed by combinations of features,
                                             and therefore differential diagnoses of single features are of limited utility. Readers should
                                             consult databases of medical dysmorphology for this information (London Dysmorphology
                                             Databases, version 1.0.14, 2008; POSSUM web version 2008).

                                             Bundling is a word we have used to describe a term that represents two or more component
                                             findings. The term “large nose” can serve as an example of a bundled term as the term
                                             comprises several distinct features: prominent nose; wide nasal ridge; prominent nasal tip;
                                             and broad nasal base. We have eliminated most bundled terms as they often include
                                             presumptions of pathogenesis or association, which may or may not be correct. Bundling is
                                             also problematic because it can obscure component abnormalities and if individuals are

                                               Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 January 1.
                           Allanson et al.                                                                                                               Page 4


                                             described using both the single bundled term and the component terms, it can lead to
                                             confusion. A number of terms have remained bundled, as we felt that the utility of the
                                             bundled term outweighed the potential pitfalls of bundling. If a term is considered to be
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             bundled, this is mentioned in the definition and the individual components are indicated in
                                             the description.

                              The Future of the Terminology Project
                                             While the project thus far has taken more than five years, there is a long road ahead. The
                                             present series of papers should be considered a starting point, and we enthusiastically solicit
                                             input from colleagues within and beyond the field of dysmorphology on some of the
                                             difficult issues described here to correct, edit, modify, or extend the definitions. We
                                             acknowledge that we are a self-selected special interest group and do not claim to represent
                                             the international dysmorphology community. We want the definitions to be available and
                                             useful to a large community of clinicians and researchers. Thus, we plan to distribute them
                                             to other expert groups including dentists, ophthalmologists, dermatologists and other non-
                                             geneticists for comments in their area of expertise. Our intent is to use this input to refine the
                                             terms and definitions, add the body parts that we have not yet defined, and publish the
                                             complete group of terms needed to describe the human phenotype as a monograph. With
                                             time we hope to make them available in other languages.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             We are presently working on adapting the working groups that established the definitions
                                             presented here into a permanent international nomenclature committee, such as the ones that
                                             exist in cytogenetics (International Standard of Cytogenetic Nomenclature) and molecular
                                             genetics (The Human Genome Variation Society nomenclature recommendations). Such a
                                             committee could periodically review the definitions and change them where necessary.
                                             Edward Sapir (1884-1939) is famous for his axiom “Language structures thought”. We hope
                                             our joint effort will help to structure the language we use in dysmorphology.

                              Acknowledgments
                                             We are grateful for financial support from the Birth Defects Foundation – Newlife (UK), Institute of Child Health
                                             (UK), National Foundation of the March of Dimes (USA), National Human Genome Research Institute (USA),
                                             Catholic University of Rome (Italy), and John Wiley and Sons publishing. In the initial phase of the project Drs
                                             Heval Ozgen and Jan Maarten Cobben (Amsterdam) provided invaluable input.


                              References
                                             Allanson JE, Cunniff C, Hoyme HE, McGaughran J, Muenke M, Neri G. Elements of morphology:
                                               head and face. Am J Med Genet. 2009
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             Biesecker LG, Aase JM, Clericuzio C, Gurrieri F, Temple K, Toriello H. Elements of morphology:
                                               hands and feet. Am J Med Genet. 2009
                                             Carey JC, Cohen MM Jr, Curry C, Devriendt K, Holmes L, Verloes A. Elements of morphology: oral
                                               region. Am J Med Genet. 2009
                                             Hall BD, Graham JM Jr, Cassidy SB, Opitz JM. Elements of morphology: periorbital area. Am J Med
                                               Genet. 2009
                                             Hennekam RCM, Cormier-Daire V, Hall J, Méhes K, Patton M, Stevenson R. Elements of
                                               morphology: nose and philtrum. Am J Med Genet. 2009
                                             Hunter A, Frias J, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Hughes H, Jones K, Wilson L. Elements of morphology:
                                               Ear. Am J Med Genet. 2009




                                                Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 January 1.
                           Allanson et al.                                                                                                Page 5
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             Figure 1.
                                             Nomenclature group members present in November 2006 in Rome (Suzanne Cassidy was
                                             also present but could not be depicted on this picture). From left to the right are visible (first
                                             row) Helga Toriello, Cynthia Curry, Julie McGaughran, M Michael Cohen Jr, Louise
                                             Wilson, John Carey, Fiorella Gurrieri, Valerie Cormier-Daire, (second row) Jaime Frias,
                                             Giovanni Neri, Judith Allanson, Judith Hall, Karen Temple, Alain Verloes, (third row)
                                             Michael Patton, Alasdair Hunter, Gene Hoyme, Helen Hughes, John M Graham Jr, (fourth
                                             row) Roger Stevenson, Leslie Biesecker, Koen Devriendt, Bryan Hall, and Raoul
                                             Hennekam.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                               Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 January 1.
                           Allanson et al.                                                                                                             Page 6




                                                                                             Table
                                             Nomenclature Subgroups and their members
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                           (the chair of each group is in italics)

                            Head and Face: Judith E. Allanson Chris Cunniff Gene Hoyme Julie McGaughran Max Muenke Giovanni Neri
                            Hands and Feet: Leslie G. Biesecker Jon M. Aase Carol Clericuzio Fiorella Gurrieri Karen Temple Helga Toriello
                            Mouth: John C. Carey M. Michael Cohen Jr Cynthia Curry Koen Devriendt Lewis Holmes Alain Verloes
                            Ear: Alasdair G. W. Hunter Jaime Frias Gabrielle Gillessen-Kaesbach Ken Jones Helen Hughes Louise Wilson
                            Periorbital structures: Bryan D. Hall John M. Graham Jr Suzanne B. Cassidy John M. Opitz
                            Nose and Philtrum: Raoul C. M. Hennekam Valerie Cormier-Daire Judith G. Hall Karoly Méhes Michael Patton Roger Stevenson
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                                    Am J Med Genet A. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 January 1.
